hello and welcome to the my clay Co
Studio I am Teegan and today we are
going to be talking about baking polymer
clay now easily the most frequently
asked questions that land in our inbox
are all around baking and curing polymer
clay so we wanted to do a whole video on
it for you today we are going to be
sharing our top tips as well as the
crucial things that you need to know and
we're also going to be answering some of
those frequently asked questions that we
get before we get into our top tips one
of the things that you should know about
polymer clay is that it should be a bit
bendy once it's baked properly that's
because unlike some other Clays it does
have plaster sizes added to it so it
means that once it is cured it does have
that slight Flex to it so if you are
baking your polymer clay and do find
that it's a bit flexible afterwards
congratulations you have cured your
polymer clay correctly if you're not
finding this if you're finding that your
polymer clay is brittle once it's baked
you can snap it in half or when you're
drilling jump ring holes it's just
crumbling around the hole then you
definitely need to watch this video
let's get into those top tips the first
two tips that I'm going to give you are
probably the most crucial things that
you need to know when you're baking your
polymer clay so number one is the
temperature so temperature seems like an
easy thing the packet says bake at 130°
so you turn your oven to 130° but it
doesn't bake correctly now this is quite
often because ovens are fickle things
and although you've got the temperature
set at 130° it might not actually be
baking at 130° you might find that it's
baking at 110° or it's baking at 150°
which quickly becomes a problem because
you're going to find that your Clay is
either going to be overbaked or
underbaked so if your Clay is underbaked
it can mean that your pieces will be
brittle whereas if it's overbaked you
might find that your Clay Burns so it's
really crucial that you know what
temperature your oven is baking at sit
tight because I have another tip for you
in a moment that will help with this
issue now I said that there were two
crucial things the second crucial thing
is the baking time now with polymer clay
quite often the baking time is around 30
minutes depending on the thickness of
your pieces it is important that you
bake it for this minimum baking time so
if you're going to be baking it for 10
or 15 minutes you probably will find
that it's underbaked now something that
is interesting about polymer clay is
that you can't really overbake it so
long as the temperature of your oven is
correct so for example if you were to
leave your clay pieces in the oven for
40 minutes or 50 minutes or an hour you
will likely find that they come out just
as they would if you bake them for the
30 minutes and this is one of the
fabulous things about polymer clay
because it means that you can bake it
add details to It Bake It Again add more
details and even bake it a third time
it's become a bit of a joke in the
studio that I quite often forget about
my pieces and I don't set an alarm and
they're in there for an hour or so it's
true she leaves them in there all the
time like sometimes for over an hour I
have to take them out all the time so if
you do leave them in there for longer
than that minimum baking time don't
stress they will likely be fine so the
crucial thing to know is that you need
to have them in there for that minimum
baking time but if you do leave them in
there a little bit longer it's not going
to cause any harm now I said I would
have a tip for you around the baking
temperature and that is to use an oven
thermometer now oven thermometers are
quite inexpensive you can normally pick
them up for $10 or $15 from a hardware
store or Kmart or Target and that will
mean that you're baking at an accurate
temperature so even if your oven di is
saying that it's baking at 130 and your
ovens at 150 you'll know our next tip is
to follow the manufacturer's
instructions you might find that
different brands of clay have different
recommended baking temperatures or
different recommended baking times so
it's really important that you read what
it says on the packet to ensure that you
don't underbake or overbake your clay so
our next tip is a simple one always make
sure that you preheat your oven just as
you would if you were baking cookies or
something if you don't preheat your oven
you run that risk that your pieces are
not going to be baking at the correct
temperature for the right amount of time
and they'll end up underbaked our final
tip is to test so before you get started
you want to make sure that you can find
your oven's optimal baking time and
temperature you might find that your
oven dial should be set at 150° whereas
somebody else might find that this
should be set at 110 it really depends
on the oven that you're using so if
you're just starting out you've got a
new oven we recommend doing some white
tester pieces now the reason why we say
white is because it will be easy to tell
if your oven temperature is too hot
because you'll be able to see that
they're slightly burned whereas if you
do your tester pieces in a darker color
you may not notice this so get your
tester Pieces Pop them in the oven and
from there you can adjust the
temperature higher or lower depending on
what you find it needs now I promised at
the start that we would go through a few
of the frequently asked questions that
we get so here they are why is my
polymer clay bendy we've already touched
on these polymer clay does have plastic
sizes in it so unlike some other Clays
it will be bendy if it is cured
correctly why is my clay brittle once
it's baked so there generally are two
reasons for this so one of them is going
to be all of the baking temperature and
time stuff that we've discussed today
the other reason it could be though is
the type of clay that you're using a
common thing that we see for beginners
is that they start making jewelry with
sculpy 3 now sculpy 3 is an excellent
modeling clay but it isn't so good for
making earrings and you will probably
find that if you do make earrings out of
sculpy 3 that it will be brutal once
it's baked so if you are looking to use
sculpy clay we recommend using sculpy
Primo or sculpy sule there are a range
of other Clays out there on the market
like the cernic range Fimo professional
that are also excellent for making
jewelry wi so just do your research
before you try out a new clay can I
increase the temperature that I'm baking
at to make my pieces bake quicker no
your pieces will burn do I need to tent
my pieces now for those that don't know
what tenting is basically it means just
putting a piece of foil over your clay
while it's baking so that the tops of
them don't burn now we don't ever tent
our pieces and we don't find that our
pieces burn so it might be that for
those people that are tenting their clay
pieces it could be that the element in
their oven is quite close to their clay
pieces while they're baking and this can
be quite common in toast ovens so I
would just test to see if you need to
tent your pieces if you do find that
you've got your clay baking at the
correct temperature and it is still
burning then it is something that you
can explore and see if it works for you
what baking surface do I bake my pieces
on now this is going to come down to
personal preference as well so we almost
always bake our pieces on a gloss
ceramic tile uh we like working on gloss
ceramic tiles and we can then just pop
them in the oven afterwards but there
are a range of other things that you can
bake on some of the common ones that we
see are either baking paper or also just
normal copy paper so again have a play
around and find out what works for you
do I need a special oven to bake polymer
clay in no you don't need a special oven
it's not like some other Ceramics where
you need to put them in a k you can bake
polymer clay in your normal ordinary
oven now if you don't want to bake in
your normal oven that is totally fine
you can look at one of those mini
toaster oven options you will probably
find though that they do seem to be a
little bit more fickle with getting the
right temperature so you will probably
have to do just a little bit more
testing to make sure that you get your
baking temperature correct can I bake in
an air fryer so we actually tested this
and found that we could cure our clay
correctly in an air fryer so it probably
wouldn't be my first option because if
your clay pieces aren't stuck down to
your tile they will whiz around in there
and probably destroy them um but I guess
it is an option it's probably just not
the best option can I bake my pieces in
the same oven that I cook food in while
polymer clay isn't food safe it is
non-toxic so yes you can bake your
pieces in your normal oven it is
recommended though don't bake food and
clay in there at the same time and if
you are to burn your clay in the oven I
would definitely recommend giving your
oven a proper clean before using it
again for food I hope you found our
tutorial on baking polymer clay helpful
today if you do have any questions we
would love to help you out just drop
them in the comments below otherwise
please if you have enjoyed it like And
subscribe and we will see you next time